New talking point.

Historically, indie rock was all about celebrating the artists who hustled to get heard outside of mainstream channels. By publishing zines and posting flyers, marketing and distributing their own recordings, building up a regional following through persistent touring, and so forth. The artists doing things this "old school" way were the ones that indie labels knew to sign, that music writers and fans knew to respect and support.

In the 2000s, as music moved further online, there was a need to identify the new indie behaviour. What does it mean to hustle in the internet age? It was soon established that building up a following on social media was the online equivalent of the old school ways. And so the artists doing things this "new school" way became the ones that indie labels knew to sign, and that music writers and fans knew to respect and support.

But here we are today, and building up a following on social media has become a race to the bottom. This isn't me being snarky, it's basic economics. For artists, more time and energy needs to be spent on administrative chores, just to stay even with every other artist doing the same. And for music writers and fans, it enriches the capitalist platforms they hate, it homogenises the art we consume, among many other reasons. So these days, we mostly just pay lip service to it, because its inefficacy and unsustainability are now pretty clear. There's too much to say about all this in one paragraph, but the big takeaway here is that none of this is snark. I'm not fomenting discontent. The discontent already exists.

The problem is that it takes effort to pick out the signal from the noise, and no one in indie rock is able to expend such effort. Because they're all overworked and underpaid. For almost everyone involved, from the indie labels to the music writers, it's a labour of love first and foremost. So it might seem like there's no other recourse, and we're stuck with doing things this way forever. Artists will need to keep racing each other to the bottom, less and less to be heard as a signal, and more and more just to not be drowned out by the noise.

But if we recognise that the early pioneers were admirable not for their initiative but for their ingenuity, then maybe there's a way out. Because, after all, while there's an endless supply of initiative out there, ingenuity is by nature a rare commodity. All we have to do is recognise that the artists today who most embody the spirit of the early pioneers are *not* the ones showing initiative in ways that are by now quite conventional. They're the ones coming up with ingenious ways to be heard as a signal.

And if we want to encourage more artists to get themselves heard through ingenious ways, then we need to assure them that doing so will make them just as likely to get signed by the indie labels, just as worthy of being respected and supported by music writers and fans.

Old talking point.

Historically, indie rock has been all about celebrating and respecting the artists who hustle to get heard, who put themselves out there to build up a grassroots following. So in the early days of the internet, as it became apparent that the world was moving further online, there was a transitional period when everyone was trying to figure out what the online equivalents were of the old school ways. A consensus was established that building a following on social media was the modern version of publishing a zine and putting up flyers, and that virality was the new grassroots momentum. And so these became the things we deemed worthy of our celebration and respect in the new online era.

But now a decade later, a curious thing has happened. Few out there seem able to muster any real enthusiasm when an artist uses their social media savvy to get ahead. While seeing Donald Trump excel at social media to become president certainly sped up this change in attitude, it was probably always forthcoming. But if the very notion of celebrating and respecting an artist's initiative now seems absurd, why wouldn't that have always been the case? Maybe the absurdity was always there, and the internet simply made it obvious, by taking it to its logical conclusion.

This is a depressing thought, both for our early pioneers, and for all unknown artists. For the former, because it force us to question their historical worth. And for the latter, because the indie labels and press fundamentally aren't set up to give fair consideration to every unknown artist based on their music alone. Resources are stretched too thin, people are overworked, and the signal to noise ratio is abysmally low. There needs to be some measure to ensure that only the most determined artists make it past the first round, and right now, the only one in place is to insist that every artist build a following on social media just to keep up with everyone else doing the same. It's an endless race to the bottom.

But there's good news for everyone. What if it was actually the ingenuity of those early punk and indie pioneers, not their initiative, that we've been admiring all along? In other words, maybe our respect for them was never actually based on their courage and determination to hustle. Maybe it was always based on the fact that back then, the approach they took was novel and unprecedented for unknown artists to do. If what we value is ingenuity, then their contributions to music history are as secure as ever.

And if it's ingenuity we value, then the good news for unknown artists is that they can still prove their determination in creative ways, rather than through the formulaic and soul-crushing grind of building a following on social media. For example, I'm putting out an audio webcomic, which is certainly novel and unprecedented, while requiring no less initiative. Does this embody the original spirit of the early punk and indie pioneers? I'm not sure. All I know is that proving my determination in a way that dovetails with learning new creative skills is what *I'd* rather be doing. But more to the point, shouldn't that be what *all* of us would rather see artists do?